                          ____________________

                           RESEARCH STATEMENT

                              Eric Schulte
                          ____________________


My work applies genetic programming techniques to real world software.
After two decades confined to simplified languages, genetic techniques
have recently been used to repair bugs in C programs.  I have extended
this work to multiple programming  languages, to assembly code, and to
binary ELF files.   I've applied these techniques  in embedded systems
[2],  to  patch  security vulnerabilities  in  closed-source  software
before the  software vendor  [5], and to  optimize software  to reduce
runtime and  energy consumption by  20% beyond the  best optimizations
provided by GCC [3].

I believe that  today's software tools and techniques  are the product
of an evolutionary process in which software developers are the agents
of  mutation  and  selection.   I have  empirically  demonstrated  the
presence of  the high  levels of mutational  robustness in  real world
software predicted  by this  view [4].   I would  like to  continue to
leverage  the evolved  aspects of  software to  develop new  tools and
techniques  with which  software developers  may improve,  extend, and
eventually create new software.

I  view  publications  as   "merely  advertising  scholarship,"  I  am
committed  to  releasing  the   resources  and  software  required  to
reproduce  my  work.  To  this  end,  I am  the  author  of a  popular
open-source  reproducible  research tool  kit  [1].   Adoption is  the
measure of success  for software engineering research,  and my primary
goal  is the  widespread adoption  of genetic  techniques in  software
evolution and development.

References
==========

[1]

Eric Schulte, Dan Davison, Thomas Dye, and Carsten Dominik. A
multi-language computing environment for literate programming and
reproducible research. *Journal of Statistical Software*, 46(3):1-24, 1
2012. [http](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v46/i03)

[2]

Eric Schulte, Jonathan DiLorenzo, Westley Weimer, and Stephanie Forrest.
Automated repair of binary and assembly programs for cooperating
embedded devices. In *Proceedings of the eighteenth international
conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems*. ACM, 2013.

[3]

Eric Schulte, Jonathan Dorn, Stephen Harding, Stephanie Forrest, and
Westley Weimer. Post-compiler software optimization for reducing energy.
In *Proceedings of the eighteenth international conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems*.
ACM, 2014. 

[4]

Eric Schulte, ZacharyP. Fry, Ethan Fast, Westley Weimer, and Stephanie
Forrest. Software mutational robustness. *Genetic Programming and
Evolvable Machines*, pages 1-32, 2013.
[DOI](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10710-013-9195-8)

[5]

Eric Schulte, Westley Weimer, and Stephanie Forrest. Repairing security
vulnerabilities in the netgear router binary. Submitted, December 2013.
